---
title: 'AIA/SCS Annual Meeting 2018 - Boston: Part 2.'
date: 2018-01-10
permalink: /posts/2018/01/scs2/
tags:
  - SCS
---

Here's part 2 of my SCS blog! I posted Part 1, on the OGL Workshop at Tufts, [here](https://dlibatique.github.io/posts/2018/01/scs1), so feel free to read through that if you haven't yet had a chance. In this portion, I'll talk about the Thursday evening and the Friday paper sessions.

# Thursday, 1/4 - Python Meet Up and the Opening Reception

Thursday began with a very informal meet up of digitally-inclined Classicists and archaeologists who use the coding language Python in their work, organized (or, well, super relaxedly convened via Twitter?) by Pat Burns ([@diyclassics](https://twitter.com/diyclassics)). There were about seven of us in all, including James Tauber and Helma Dik of Logeion / Attikos, and the conversation was lively! There are some plans hopefully coming to fruition soon that I don't want to scoop, but it suffices to say that there are some exciting Python-related things in the works for Classicists/archaeologists.

The theme of the day seemed to be personal connections. Afterward, I very briefly attended a post-OGL Workshop happy hour / dinner at Earle's in the Prudential Center and chatted with James a little further about his company, Eldarion, and how he came to be involved in the Perseus Project. After I left there, I had some time to kill, so I ended up sitting and chatting with Alexis Whalen ([@donumexitiale](https://twitter.com/donumexitiale)), who I had met earlier in the day and is friends with one of my BU colleagues, Ian Nurmi, about grad life, her teaching job in LA, and my dissertation topic. I didn't put two and two together until Ian and I were talking about how much I loved the [Itinera](http://itinerapodcast.libsyn.com) podcast by Scott Lepisto ([@scottlepisto](https://twitter.com/scottlepisto)) and he helped me realize that Alexis was the second interviewee featured! In the podcast, I appreciated her take on the use of spoken, living Latin in the classroom, so it was great to actually have some time to sit and chat with her face to face. She also had some wonderfully insightful observations about the *Pervigilium Veneris*, which forms the subject of the fourth chapter of my dissertation and has been giving me some writing problems recently, so a fresh take from a pair of unfamiliar eyes was very much needed and appreciated.

We continued to hang out into the opening reception, where we met up eventually with my BU colleagues. There was wine, there was food, there were friends -- we all had a great time.

# Friday, 1/5 - Agency in Drama, Harassment in Academia, Material Girls, Presidential Panel and Plenary Session
## #Session9 - Agency in Drama (Helene Foley presiding)

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">First up this morning at <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/AIASCS?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#AIASCS</a>: <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/session9?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#session9</a>, Agency in Drama (Helene Foley presiding) <a href="https://t.co/neotQV4aeR">pic.twitter.com/neotQV4aeR</a></p>&mdash; DLibatique10 (@DLibatique10) <a href="https://twitter.com/DLibatique10/status/949266270154842112?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 5, 2018</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

This panel had the unenviable position of being in the first slot on Friday after a day or two of insane travel delays or outright cancellations. First up, **J. Fenno (U. of Mississippi)** ([Tweet thread here](https://twitter.com/DLibatique10/status/949266865934798849)) presented a reading of passages from Sophocles' *Electra* that allude to a sense of living death or potential afterlife that attempted to work against prevailing scholarly readings of those passages. The readings themselves made sense, though I sometimes lost the thread of how they compared against those existing readings or even what those readings were. Next, **M. Dolinar (U. of Wisconsin - Madison)** ([Tweet thread here](https://twitter.com/DLibatique10/status/949275168941203456)) argued for agency in Euripides' Alcestis in the first half of her eponymous play. Given my interest in female agency through speech in my dissertation, I was excited for this paper. Dolinar argued that Alcestis takes the initiative in preparing for her own funeral rites and establishing her eternal presence and role in the home, which will persist after she is gone. I was convinced, though I posed the question afterward about squaring away this agency of the half of the play with the remarkable deprivation of it and the attention drawn to it with Alcestis' voiceless return as pretty much a visual object; the agency of Heracles in this regard also problematizes the black-and-white view of Alcestis as a full agent in her own right. **C. Simone (Columbia)** ([Tweet thread here](https://twitter.com/DLibatique10/status/949281952523341824)) was unable to attend, but his paper on the *aulos* and auletic music as choreographers of Heracles' madness in the play was absolutely fascinating. Fun fact: I learned from this paper that the *aulos* sounded more like bagpipes than the modern flute. It was fun to have Helene Foley and Nancy Worman, who are advising Simone on his dissertation, presiding over the panel and in the audience respectively to explain a few things and take notes and questions to bring back to him. Finally, **[E. Wong](http://melpomeneswork.com) (Independent)** ([Tweet thread here](https://twitter.com/DLibatique10/status/949291172769476608)) was also absent, so his paper was read in absentia -- UNTIL! he quite dramatically arrived literally two or three pages into the reading of his paper. So, he then took over. Talk about "low probability, high consequence!" Wong used the case study of Aeschylus' *Septem* to make the argument for a theory he calls "risk theatre" -- namely, that theatre is a series of events that can be seen as low probability but high consequence, like Polynices and Eteocles meeting at the seventh gate. He included a lot of statistics and interesting observations, though I (and a few others talking about the panel afterward) couldn't help but note that Wong's theory was, well, applicable to almost all theatrical plays.

## #Session12 - Harassment and Academia: Old Battles and New Frontiers (Organized by the COmmittee on Gender and Sexuality in the Profession and WCC)

