---
title: "From Lead Role to Stage Body: The Disappearance of Tecmessa in Sophocles’ Ajax"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2013-11-07-tecmessa
venue: "CUNY Comparative Literature Graduate Conference"
date: 2013-11-07
location: "New York, NY"
---

In Sophocles&apos; Ajax, the character Tecmessa undergoes a marked shift from Ajax&apos;s passionate concubine to a mute stage body in the second half of the play. In this paper, I investigate the impact of Tecmessa&apos;s maintenance of a somatic presence on stage but near effacement in the dramaturgical structure of the plot after Ajax’s death. She initially provides the main obstacle to Ajax’s will to die, delivering powerful monologues to deter him from committing suicide, and as a result, she is at once eloquent, rational, and sympathetic to the audience. Tecmessa’s voice disappears, however, upon Teucer’s entrance after the discovery of Ajax’s suicide. Indeed, after Teucer orders her to retrieve her son Eurysaces, she leaves the stage and returns as a mute, never to speak again, little more than a body in the stage picture. // I argue that this shift is a deliberate choice on Sophocles’ part to highlight the effects of a world post-Ajax. The first half of the play is filled with dynamic action, metrically-complex choral odes, and powerful diction, due in large part to the repartee between Ajax and Tecmessa. Ajax’s suicide marks the halfway point, and the second half by comparison settles into what some have considered a bland, uneventful extended debate. Tecmessa is a remnant of Ajax’s world of activity, a woman now forced to live in a world where speech reigns supreme. Her somatic presence in this second half of the play, coupled with the disappearance of a speaking voice or any plot-driving action, creates a liminality that comments on the passing of the heroic, active age of Ajax.
