---
title: "Rumor, Speech, and the Fall of a Homeric Age in Sophocles’ Ajax"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2013-10-26-ajax
venue: "University of Florida Graduate Conference"
date: 2013-10-26
location: "Gainesville, FL"
---

In this paper, I investigate the coincidence of the fall of the Homeric age of heroic deeds and the rise of an age where words and persuasion hold more sway. In Sophocles’ *Ajax*, the report of the eponymous protagonist&apos;s foiled plot to murder the Greek army and its commanders forces him to preclude suffering through the inevitable ignominy by committing suicide. That threat lay concentrated in the capacity of speech and rumor to destroy a reputation, but the potency of speech carries even stronger ramifications for the world of the play.  

Ajax, Tecmessa, Teucer, and Odysseus each demonstrate the different effects of speech and its use. Ajax laments speech’s power to undermine his deeds. Tecmessa’s voice, so powerful in the first half of the play, is wrested away after Ajax kills himself and she becomes a mute character. Teucer finds himself at an impasse with the Atreidae when his speech cannot change their minds. Odysseus, however, breaks through the impasse and achieves Ajax’s burial with the very speech-related qualities that Ajax and the Chorus denigrate in the first half of the play. The journey of speech from source of censure to privileged mode of effecting action mirrors a sea change from a wartime world of the individual and aristeia through deeds to a peacetime world of the community and aristeia through words.
