---
title: "Facundum faciebat amor: The Absence of Tereus’ Direct Speech in Ovid’s Metamorphoses 6"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2017-03-17-facundum-faciebat-amor
venue: "CANE"
date: 2017-03-17
location: "Exeter, NH"
---

In this paper, I examine Ovid’s Philomela narrative (Met. 6.424-674) and analyze one of its narratological features overlooked in major scholarship on the episode (e.g., Peek 2003, Segal 1992, Gildenhard and Zissos 2007, Feldherr 2008): the surprising absence of direct speech attributed to Tereus, the Thracian king who married the Athenian princess Procne and raped and mutilated her sister Philomela. The narrator draws attention to this lack of a direct voice through numerous references to Tereus’ vocality and eloquence throughout the narrative (e.g., facundum faciebat amor, “Love made him eloquent,” 469). While he acts as the agent of nineteen verbs or phrases of speech which take direct objects, introduce indirect speech or questions, or serve as speech acts (compared to Philomela’s three or Procne’s eight), he speaks directly only twice (513, 652) and each time for less than one line of hexameter. This absence of a voice stands in stark contrast to the impassioned monologue of Philomela (533-548) and soliloquy of Procne (611-635). His relative silence is further brought into relief by the overt presence of the narrator, who amplifies his control over Tereus’ characterization through detailed description of his thought processes and dreams and constant parenthetical comments and direct addresses to the audience. // I argue that the poet’s overt manipulation of the direct speech (or lack thereof) of the characters in this narrative may illustrate his artistic anxiety over a new environment of poetic production under the burgeoning principate. Poets in this era are becoming increasingly aware of the disparity of power between the princeps and the other Roman nobles, one in which speech and artistic production are increasingly important tools used to craft or combat an ideology, to grant or withhold agency. In the face of increasing constraint, Ovid uses his portrayal of Tereus and Philomela in particular to assert his own agency; he draws attention to his careful control over Tereus’ speech and characterization, and he depicts Philomela as an analogue to himself through her ability to communicate through art despite the efforts of a tyrant to silence her.
