---
title: "The Metrical Form of the Pervigilium Veneris"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2018-03-16-pv-meter
venue: "CANE"
date: 2018-03-16
location: "Kingston, RI"
---

In this paper, I analyze the metrical form of the Pervigilium Veneris, a quasi-hymnic poem of uncertain authorship and date, though recent scholarly consensus generally places it in the 4th century C.E. The author composed the poem in trochaic tetrameter catalectic, a return to Greek precedent, though it shares affinities with the Latin trochaic septenarius. While previous scholarship analyzes the poem’s metrics almost exclusively to argue about the poem’s date, my paper is the first to attempt to explain why the poet uses a trochaic rhythm that is incongruous with the poem’s thematic content, a panegyric to Venus and the rebirth of spring. // According to Aristotle, Greek trochaic rhythm is linked with various contexts, from the comic (Rh. 1408b36-1409a1) to the vituperative, as in Archilochus (Rh. 1418b23-33). Trochaic tetrameter also serves specific purposes in dramatic monologues and dialogues, such as leave-taking in Sophocles’ Oedipus Tyrannus (1517-1530). Latin trochaic rhythm, aside from the expected tragic and comic contexts, was used in children’s nursery rhymes and soldiers’ ribald, abusive songs at military triumphs. A commonality between Greek and Roman uses of iambo-trochaic rhythms is their evocation of everyday speech; the alternation of long and short syllables mimics most faithfully the natural rhythm of the voice in non-musical contexts. // The trochaic rhythm in the Pervigilium Veneris, then, seems incongruous with such prior uses as Old Comic dancing, invective, or nursery rhymes, and it cannot be explained by any desire of the poet to mimic natural speech, given the poem’s intricate structure and stylized refrain. I argue that this incongruity is a deliberate choice meant to assert the poet’s originality in the face of increasing artistic constraint in Late Antiquity, an environment in which the generic Zeitgeist tended towards panegyric and other forms of constrictive literature.